
RAFAEL IRIZARRY: This week we're going to be talking about batch effects
and how to adjust for them.
Now, to understand why batch effects are a problem,
we're going to start discussing confounding, explain what it is,
explain how it could affect your bottom line results.
So I'm going to give you an example.
It's a very famous example of confounding
can confuse you if you're not careful in analyzing the data.
This comes from admissions data from UC Berkeley in 1973.
The university was being sued for gender discrimination.
And the evidence for it basically came down to this table.
So if you look at this table closely, you're
going to see that while 45% of males were being accepted
into graduate programs, only 30% of females were.
Here we can do a chi-square test, as we learned in previous modules,
to find that a discrepancy such as this is very unlikely to happen by chance
if gender and admissions are in fact independent of each other.
Now when we look at the data little bit more carefully,
we see something that appears to be a paradox.
If we split this data by major-- so there's six majors--
you're going to see that the admissions rates are about the same.
And in fact, it appears to favor females.
For example, Major A clearly favors females.
So how can this possibly be happening?
We have at each major admission slightly favoring females.
But as an aggregate, the admissions are clearly favoring male.
So to understand why that happens, we have to understand what confounding is.
In this case we have that the number of applications
is confounded with admissions rate, especially for males.
So it turns out that males are more likely to apply to quote, unquote,
"easy" majors or easy to get in majors than females.
So it appeared that they were being admitted more often, when
in fact what was happening was that by their own choice
they were applying to the easier majors.
And you can see it in this picture.
If you look at the 1s, those are the males.
On the x-axis we have the percent that get into the major.
So this is a major that's a little easier to get into than this one.
Well, more than a little.
And then on the y-axis, we have the percent
of admissions that went to that major.
So you can see very strong association between the admissions rate of a major
and the total number of applications or percent of applications for males.
But we don't see that pattern for females.
So to very clearly see this, I'm going to show
you this data in graphical form.
In this plot, I have every person is represented by a little dot.
If you look closely enough, you're going to see that there's As, Bs,
Cs, Ds, Es, and Fs.
Those are the majors.
And the colors represent green means you got in.
You got admitted.
And orange means you didn't.
So when we look at it like this, when we put all the majors together,
it's clear that males are admitting more often.
You can see there's much more-- as a percent,
there's much more green than orange on the male side of the graph
than on the female side of the graph.
But now we're going to take this same data, these same individuals.
We're going to add any.
We're not going to take any away.
All we're going to do is reshuffle them by their majors, which
is already done by the letters, the symbols.
But now we're actually going to split them up and stratify.
Stratification is a powerful way of finding confounders.
So once we stratify, if we go major by major,
you can see there does not appear to be any gender bias.
Every single one has about the same rate of admissions.
Now where you can see a humongous difference is in these majors.
These are the majors with a lot of green.
Those are again quote, unquote, the "easy" majors to get into.
And in those two rows, you can see which of the two genders is applying more.
So this fact, that you have so many men applying to these two majors,
explains why you see more green here than here.
Again, it's confounding.
It's not in this case bias coming from the admissions offices.
It's confounding with the fact that males were applying to the easy majors.
So as we just said, one way of parsing this out is by stratifying.
And here we can see the proportions that are admitted by major.
You're going to see there's a difference.
You should compute the difference at the level of major.
So you stratify, then compute differences.
And if we do that, if we compute the difference between males and females
in each one of these and take an average,
we see that they're roughly admitted at the same rate.
In fact, women on average have a 3.5% higher rate.
So this is a very, very famous example of confounding.
It's very commonly used to explain it.
But it shows up in other instances.
Here's another case from baseball.
And in this case, what I'm showing you is
if you look at-- this is data, batting averages for Derek Jeter
and David Justice in 1995-- that was Jeter's first year-- and 1996.
If you look at their batting averages in these two years,
both years David Justice had a higher batting average than Jeter.
Both years.
But in the combined, if you combine these two years,
Jeter has a much higher batting average than David Justice.
So how is that possible?
Again, it's confounding.
Jeter batted fewer times in 1995 when he had a lower batting average.
And he batted many more times in 1996 when
he had a much higher batting average, while the opposite is
true for David Justice.
So once you aggregate all that up, you see
that combined, Jeter is the better hitter.
So we're going to see that confounding shows up in genomics data.
And it causes a lot of trouble if you don't realize that you have it
and if you don't adjust for it.
And we're going to do that in the next modules.
