
RAFAEL IRIZARRY: In this module, we're going to give an example of how confounding
can affect a genomics data analysis.
We're going to use data from a paper that had as one of the results
that if you compared two ethnic groups and their gene expression,
they had thousands of genes differentially expressed.
A very large percentage of genes were differentially expressed.
We downloaded this data and performed the analyses ourselves
and in fact, we did find the same thing.
Here is a histogram of p values on the left and a volcano plot on the right.
And you can see that if we just by eye, we
can see that perhaps something like 70% of genes
would be called differentially expressed,
even after adjusting for multiple comparison.
And we can see on the volcano plot that the effect sizes
are pretty large in some cases as well.
So this, it's a very striking result.
I think we would not expect there to be so many differences between two
ethnic groups.
I mean, at the end of the day, we're both humans,
and this is quite a dramatic difference.
So if you look at the data a little bit more closely,
and you extracted dates from the files that
have the data-- something that you'll learn to do in the labs
and by looking at the code for this lecture--
you'll see that the two ethnic groups are confounded with year.
So this ethnic group over here had most of the data processed in 2004
and before.
The second one and this other ethnic group
had most of it processed in 2005 and after that.
So just like we saw in the previous model,
a confounded variable can make things seem
more different than they really are.
And they can even make it seem different when they're really not different.
The same can happen with genomics data.
It's pretty much the same phenomenon.
So to show how this can happen, we're going to take two batches.
We're going to define them as batches.
We're going to take October 2005 and compare it to June 2005,
and we're going to stick to one ethnic group.
So we're not going to have the two.
We're just going to have one of them.
And we're going to do the same analysis.
So when we do this analysis, the only difference is the date.
And when we compare genes from one batch the other,
we again get many, many differentially expressed genes.
So now the question is, when we saw the differences between the ethnic groups,
we know that that includes a date effect.
We know it.
It could also include an ethnic background effect.
But what we do know for sure, is that it does include a date effect.
So how do we parse those two out?
In this case, the experimental design was such
that data was pretty much completely confounded.
There's one or two exceptions of samples from the two ethnic groups that
were run in the same batch.
But overall, they were very confounded.
In this case, it's almost impossible to separate the two.
Next module, we're going to take a subset of this data set
to show how we can adjust for batch effects
and find signal that has been corrected for it.
