
RAFAEL IRIZARRY: So, in a way, dendrograms, clustering, the results of clustering,
are data summaries just like any other data summary,
similar to the t-statistic.
The t-statistic is a data summary.
The one big difference, though, is that while summaries such as the t-statistic
are univariate, it's just one number, a dendrogram is not that simple.
It has many different aspects to it.
So what we can easily describe how much a t-statistic varies due to chance.
It's a little bit harder to show, or to describe,
how clustering could have been different-- had we had another sample,
had measurement error been different-- but it is a random quantity.
So I want to illustrate that to give you a sense of how
strong the effect of variability can be on clustering.
This is particularly important to keep in mind because, in the literature,
you usually don't see uncertainty summaries attached to clustering, which
makes some people believe that they're deterministic.
That this is the only cluster they could have happened.
That this is the final answer.
When, in fact, they are random just like any other summary statistic we compute.
So just to illustrate, I want to show you
a simple example created with simulations
which you can see in the class notes.
So for this stimulation, I created four profiles based on 50 genes.
So these 50 genes are different in the four profiles.
And then I created from those, 10 biological replicates from each group.
I added a little bit of measurement error.
And when I cluster these samples, we get perfect clustering,
and by group, which is not surprising.
Each group has a different profile therefore the distance between groups
is much bigger than the distance within group.
Now this is actually a realistic example.
Now let's suppose we run a microarray or we perform an RNA-seq experiment.
Now we have the 50 genes that changed plus thousands of others that don't.
So what happens when you add this is to the simulation, where you add thousands
of genes that don't change to the 50 that do?
Look at how much the clustering changes.
And no longer are the samples grouped by their original true profile.
You can see there's 2's and 4's here.
There's 2's mixed with the 4's, et cetera.
So that's a very important fact to keep in mind,
that clustering is also a random result.
