RAFAEL IRIZARRY: In this video, we're going
to introduce the concept of distance in the context of the analysis
of high throughput data.
Clustering is a methodology that requires us to define distance.
Clustering is something that we do, and implicitly or explicitly, we
use distance to do it.
For example, when we cluster animals into groups, in a way,
we are defining a distance.
We're saying which animals are closer to each other,
and which animals are further away from each other.
If you read the genomics literature, you'll
have seen heatmaps such as this one.
In a heatmap, you can see on the left and the top,
you can see that there's a dendrogram, and these are created using clustering.
Therefore, we need to define distances between both rows
and columns of the data matrix.
So let's start with just a simple definition of distance.
This is just the Euclidean distance, if you
have two points in a Euclidean space.
We know how to compute the distance.
We subtract the difference in the x-axis, the difference in the y-axis,
square them, add them, and take the square root.
Now, in high dimensional data, we can't really
do that because points are not two dimensional.
Here's an example of a data set that we have been looking at.
And this is just the first 10 rows and five columns of a data set
that includes gene expression measurements for thousands
of genes on dozens of samples.
So to be able to talk about distance in this context,
the first thing we have to do is define what a point is.
We no longer have two points in space or in a Cartesian plane.
Instead, we have these, in the case of samples,
we have these long vectors that are 22,000-plus numbers long.
Now, once we know what the point is, then
we'll have to define what distance means for two samples or two columns,
and what distance means between two features or two rows,
or in the case of this data set, they're genes.
All right, so a point-- so a sample is simply a point in, in this case,
22,215 dimensional space.
Every gene gets a number, and all these numbers together
define a point for a sample.
In the case of features or genes, because this data set
has 189 columns, that's the number of dimensions we have for each feature.
Then once we've defined points, then we basically use the same definition
that we use for two dimensions.
We take the sum of the differences squared, and then take the square root,
as shown in this formula for samples i and j.
So here, as an example, is the distance between the third
and the seventh column.
So you can see in the formula, we're simply
taking the third column and the seventh column
and applying the formula that we just showed.
For the rows, it's the same definition.
Instead now, we add across the samples.
For each sample, we take the difference between the two genes,
square it, add them, take the square root.
So here's that formula applied to the row 5,124 and the row 11,924.
All right, so one last bit of math-- using
what we learned in the second course, we can
define distance, squared in this case, using the sum of squares.
That's what we do to compute distance between the difference
between the columns.
So you can see here, the cross product between the difference between two
columns defines the distance squared between those two columns.
So this is a mathematical approach that we
can use to compute distances very quickly,
and we'll see that going forward.